---
layout: post
title:  "Exercise 4 - Review Lesson 3 Solution & Introduce CPP Core Guidelines"
---

<div class="box" markdown="1">
Exercise 4 Objective
: Review Lesson 3 solution and understand the motivation for some of the implementation choices
</div>

These exercises are based on two sets of guidelines.  For a coding
standard we use the [Google C++ coding
standard](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html).  That is
way less significant, though, than the use of the [C++ Core
Guidelines](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines).
The Core Guidelines don't cover variable naming, but they do provide a
set of "best practices".

As with the coding standards, please don't try and read the guidelines
front to back.  I will refer to them as we discuss the code, and they
will look like [**SF.8: Use #include guards for all .h
files**](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rs-guards)

My solution to the exercise, which may be quite different than yours,
is in the Exercise2-solution branch.

Lets look at one of the class

~~~ c++
#ifndef CDL_SURFACE_H_
#define CDL_SURFACE_H_

#include <SDL2/SDL.h>
#include <SDL2/SDL_image.h>
#include "dimensions.h"
#include "exception.h"

namespace cdl {

class Texture;

class Surface {
public:
        Surface(std::string file_name) {
                surface_ = IMG_Load(file_name.c_str());
                
                if (!surface_) {
                        throw exception(SDL_GetError());
                }
        }

        Surface(const Surface &other) = delete;

        ~Surface() {
                SDL_FreeSurface(surface_);
        }

        size size() const {
                return cdl::size{surface_->w, surface_->h};
        }

private:
        friend class Texture;
        SDL_Surface *surface_;
};

}

#endif /* CDL_SURFACE_H_ */
~~~

1. Line 1
: Both the Google coding standards and the C++ Core Guidelines state
that [**SF.8: Use #include guards for all .h
files**](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rs-guards).

2. Line 4
: The Google coding standards phrase this well..."Header files should
be self-contained (compile on their own) and end in .h".  This means
any SDL header files needed by this header file should also be
included here.

3. Line 9
: We include all our CDL classes and code in the CDL namespace.  Often
people's only exposure to namespaces is to put "using namespace std"
at the top their code.  In fact, many production C++ projects frown on
that, since coding something like `std::vector` makes it very obvious
that this particular vector is the one from the C++ Standard Library
(STL.) The Google guidelines explicitly state "Do not use
using-directives (e.g. using namespace foo)." The C++ Core Guidelines
are a little more flexible, stating "using namespace can lead to name
clashes, so it should be used sparingly."

3. Line 11
: We *forward declare* the Texture class.  We'll discuss why later,
but we do this to avoide [SF.9: Avoid cyclic dependencies among source
files](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rs-cycles)

3. Lines 13-21
: Finally we define our Surface class, with a constructor that in turn
calls the SDL library and stores the resulting pointer in a member
variable.

3. Line 23
: We delete the **copy constructor**.  This is one of the trickiest
parts of this assignment.  Each `Surface` object contains a
`SDLSurface` pointer, and when the destructor of the object is called,
the `SDL_FreeSurface` function is called.  If this object is ever
*copied*, `SDL_FreeSurface` will be called twice on the same pointer.
One place the object would be copied is if a `cdl::Surface` is passed
by *value*.  The `cards.cpp` file explicity makes the call
~~~c++
cdl::Texture club_texture = renderer.createTexture(club_surface);
~~~
which, unless coded properly, will result in that behaviour.

      C++ allows us to prevent that behaviour by [C.81: Use =delete when you
want to disable default behavior (without wanting an
alternative)](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines???#Rc-delete)

      Historically C++ code achieved the same goal by making methods
`private`, but the recommended practice with modern C++ is to use 
`= delete'.  This makes it very clear to any users of the class, and
the compiler, that this method should not be called.

3. Line 29
: We implement a `size` menthod.  The method is marked `const` because
it does not change the class in any way.  This again is important
information to tell both humans and compilers. [Con.2: By default,
make member functions
const](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines???#Rconst-fct).

3. Lines 33-35
: We use `private` to [C.9: Minimize exposure of
members](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines???#c9-minimize-exposure-of-members). In
fact, part of the whole objective of the `cdl` set of classes is that
the user should never have to deal with SDL pointers.  In fact, we
want to **prevent** users of our class from even being able to acquire
an SDL pointer.  The Texture class needs access to the `SDL_Surface`
pointer to make the `SDL_CreateTextureFromSurface()` call.  We could
have implemented a `getSDLSurface()` method in our `cdl::Surface`
class, but we are begging for some user to mis-use that data.  The
solution is to make `cdl::Texture` a `friend` of the `cdl::Surface`
class, and just reach into the class's private data (and yes, there
are C++ jokes about the fact that only friends can access your
privates.)

The "dimension" header file looks as follows:
~~~ c++
#ifndef CDL_DIMENSIONS_H_
#define CDL_DIMENSIONS_H_

namespace cdl {

struct size {
	int width;
	int height;
};

struct position {
	int x;
	int y;
};

}
#endif /* CDL_DIMENSIONS */
~~~

In this case we have used `structs` for the data, as recommended in
[C.2: Use class if the class has an invariant; use struct if the data
members can vary
independently](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines???#Rc-struct).

Finally, in our Renderer class, we have the following menthod:
~~~ c++
void add(const Texture &texture, const position &pos) {
	size s = texture.size();
	SDL_Rect rect{pos.x, pos.y, s.width, s.height};
	SDL_RenderCopy(renderer_, texture.texture_, nullptr, &rect);
}
~~~

The parameters here are passed as *const references*.  Firstly,
passing Texture by reference avoids the whole "copy/duplicate
destruction" problem discussed at the beginning of this section.
The C++ Core Guidelines state [F.16: For “in” parameters, pass
cheaply-copied types by value and others by reference to
const](http://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines???#f16-for-in-parameters-pass-cheaply-copied-types-by-value-and-others-by-reference-to-const).
In fact, the `position` parameter probably meets the guidelines of a
"cheaply copied type".  In practice I personally prefer to generally
pass structures and classes by reference whenever possible. 